== Target Audience ==

CSO Threat Hunters and Task 3 program staff, as well as anyone in CSO that may benefit from a guide in investigation of RMM activity in the environment.

== Introduction ==

Remote Monitoring and Management (RMM) tools are often used by IT organizations to support internal customers (employees) as well as to implement system changes and patching. Threat actors also use RMMs for persistence and defense evasion, as most security tools recognize RMM tools as legitimate software. This creates a detection challenge when analyzing RMM activity for suspicious/malicious behavior that requires looking at surrounding activity. Installation methods and actions taken by the RMM are valuable activities to look into for context around the intention of the RMM installation.

In general, organizations should know what RMMs are supported or sanctioned and investigate any RMM activity outside of that known-good activity. In practice, this is difficult in complex organizations where shadow IT, contractor tools, and legacy support arrangements introduce RMMs outside the authorized inventory.

This guide is meant to assist analysts in making determinations about the disposition of RMM activity in the environment.

== References on RMM Threat Hunting ==

=== General ===

* '''[https://www.cisa.gov/news-events/cybersecurity-advisories/aa23-025a CISA AA23-025A] — ''Protecting Against Malicious Use of Remote Monitoring and Management Software'' (CISA / NSA / MS-ISAC, Jan 2023).''' The foundational government advisory on RMM abuse. Documents the FCEB phishing campaign that distributed AnyDesk and ScreenConnect as portable executables. Mitigations section is the canonical reference for the "what RMMs are sanctioned" governance posture this KB enforces. STIX IOCs available via the same page.
* '''[https://www.cisa.gov/news-events/cybersecurity-advisories/aa25-163a CISA AA25-163A] — ''Ransomware Actors Exploit Unpatched SimpleHelp RMM to Compromise Utility Billing Software Provider'' (Jun 2025).''' Sector-relevant for our environment given the healthcare/utility-billing adjacency. Documents CVE-2024-57727 / 57728 / 57726 chain exploitation, IOCs, and detection guidance. Includes the <code>serviceconfig.xml</code> extraction logic referenced in our SimpleHelp profile.
* '''[https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/security/blog/2024/05/15/threat-actors-misusing-quick-assist-in-social-engineering-attacks-leading-to-ransomware/ Microsoft Threat Intelligence] — ''Threat actors misusing Quick Assist in social engineering attacks leading to ransomware'' (May 2024).''' Source reference for the Storm-1811 / Black Basta vishing-to-Quick Assist tradecraft. Directly relevant to our authorized RMM list because Quick Assist is sanctioned in our environment but is the active abuse target for this cluster. Detection-side recommendations apply directly to the ''Authorized RMM Risk Notes'' section above.

=== Case Studies ===

* '''[https://www.sophos.com/en-us/blog/sophos-mdr-tracks-two-ransomware-campaigns-using-email-bombing-microsoft-teams-vishing Sophos MDR] — ''Sophos MDR tracks two ransomware campaigns using "email bombing," Microsoft Teams "vishing"'' (Jan 2025).''' Documents STAC5777 (Storm-1811 overlap) and STAC5143 (FIN7-adjacent) using Quick Assist and Teams vishing for initial access. 15+ incidents in three months. Higher operational density than the Microsoft writeup; includes the email-bombing volumetric metrics (3,000 messages/hour) and the specific malware loaded post-Quick Assist (Python/Kryptic, RPivot, winhttp.dll loaders).
* '''[https://news.sophos.com/en-us/2025/05/27/dragonforce-actors-target-simplehelp-vulnerabilities-to-attack-msp-customers/ Sophos News] — ''DragonForce actors target SimpleHelp vulnerabilities to attack MSP, customers'' (May 2025).''' The MSP supply-chain incident behind CISA AA25-163A. Walks the kill chain from CVE-2024-57727 server compromise through downstream client compromise via legitimate SimpleHelp RMM push. Confirms the path-traversal → privilege-escalation → arbitrary-file-upload chain.
* '''[https://www.huntress.com/blog/remote-monitoring-management-tools-gateway-for-attacks-on-msp-pt-1 Huntress] — ''RMM Tools: A Gateway for Bulk Attacks on MSP Customers, Pt. 1'' (Jul 2025).''' Walks the Atera → Cloudflared tunnel chain in an MSP intrusion targeting downstream customers with Akira ransomware. Specifically traces the <code>AgentPackageRunCommandInteractive.exe</code> process lineage that we cite in the Atera profile.
* '''[https://www.huntress.com/blog/rmm-gateway-for-bulk-attacks-on-msp-customers-part-2 Huntress] — ''RMM Tools: A Gateway for Bulk Attacks on MSP Customers, Pt. 2'' (Jul 2025).''' Follow-on incident details. Documents user-account password change followed by Cloudflare tunnel install and RDP-over-tunnel testing — a recurring operator pattern worth flagging in our triage workflow.
* '''[https://www.huntress.com/blog/rmm-abuse-when-it-convenience-bites-back Huntress] — ''RMM Abuse: When IT Convenience Bites Back'' (Mar 2026).''' Synthesis post: 50% of suspicious Atera activity correlated with ransomware, ransomware impact in 1-2 hours when RustDesk/Atera is the entry vector. Includes the "fingerprinting approved tools" guidance that aligns with our [[#Section 2 — Authorized RMMs|Section 2]] approach.
* '''[https://www.securonix.com/blog/securonix-threat-research-knowledge-sharing-series-detecting-rmm-behaviors/ Securonix Threat Research] — ''Detecting Real-world Attacks Involving RMM Behaviors'' (Jul 2024).''' Detection-engineering oriented; covers Atera and Splashtop registry/process artifacts and provides hunt queries. Source includes the AnyDesk credential-extraction risk discussion and the Vice Society / Rhysida / Lockbit RMM associations. Useful as a detection-pattern reference when building Sentinel/Splunk analytics.

=== Research Papers ===

* '''[https://www.huntress.com/resources/2026-cyber-threat-report Huntress 2026 Cyber Threat Report]''' (full report, Feb 2026). 4.6M endpoints, 9.4M identities, 230,000+ organizations. Headline: '''RMM abuse +277% YoY, accounting for 24% of all observed incidents''' (up from 7% in 2024). Healthcare and technology sectors saw the largest increases — directly relevant to our environment. Specific tool-by-tool breakdown: ScreenConnect dominant for credential harvesting, NetSupport / PDQ Connect for staging, Atera and AnyDesk for ransomware execution. >50% of suspicious Atera instances correlate with ransomware. This is the primary empirical citation for our threat model.
* '''[https://www.huntress.com/resources/2026-cyber-threat-report-tldr Huntress 2026 Cyber Threat Report TL;DR].''' Short-form executive summary of the above. Useful for stakeholder briefings without distributing the 96-page report.

=== Sector-specific reporting ===

* '''Health-ISAC (member access required) — ''Threat Bulletin: SimpleHelp RMM Software Leveraged in Exploitation Attempt to Breach Networks'' (referenced in CISA AA25-163A).''' Distribute internally via the H-ISAC member portal. Sector-aligned IOCs and TTPs that may extend the public CISA reporting.
* '''Sector-shared IOC feeds (H-ISAC, MS-ISAC).''' Out-of-band IOC distribution for pre-disclosure and tactical IOCs that don't reach public CISA bulletins. Cross-reference any RMM-related IOC inbound from these channels against [[#Currently Active Detections|Currently Active Detections]] and [[Per-RMM Profiles]].

== Current State of RMM Detections ==

At any given time in Splunk, currently active scheduled detections can be enumerated with the following query:

<syntaxhighlight lang="splunk">
| rest /servicesNS/-/-/saved/searches splunk_server=local timeout=0
       search="is_scheduled=1 disabled=0"
| table title author "eai:acl.app" updated actions qualifiedSearch
| rename "eai:acl.app" as app
| eval haystack=title." ".qualifiedSearch
| where match(haystack,"(?i)(rmm|remote\s+monitoring|screenconnect|connectwise|anydesk|atera|action1|ninjarmm|ninjaone|splashtop|meshagent|meshcentral|tacticalrmm|simplehelp|rutserv|remote\s+utilities|syncro|pulseway|level-remote|goverlan|teamviewer|logmein|ltsvc|kaseya|zoho\s+assist|rustdesk|cloudflared|ngrok)")
| table title author app updated actions
| sort app title
</syntaxhighlight>

Note: replace placeholder keyword filters with terms relevant to the specific RMM under review. The original draft used <code>IN (*KEYWORD*)</code> which is invalid MediaWiki/SPL syntax (<code>IN</code> does not support wildcards); the corrected form above uses a regex match against a combined title+query haystack.

To filter for a single RMM, replace the regex with a specific term:

<syntaxhighlight lang="splunk">
| rest /servicesNS/-/-/saved/searches splunk_server=local timeout=0
       search="is_scheduled=1 disabled=0"
| table title author "eai:acl.app" updated actions qualifiedSearch
| rename "eai:acl.app" as app
| where match(title,"(?i)teamviewer") OR match(qualifiedSearch,"(?i)teamviewer")
</syntaxhighlight>

A more robust alternative — drive the keyword list from the <code>rmm_tools</code> lookup so there is a single source of truth:

<syntaxhighlight lang="splunk">
| rest /servicesNS/-/-/saved/searches splunk_server=local timeout=0
       search="is_scheduled=1 disabled=0"
| table title author "eai:acl.app" updated actions qualifiedSearch
| rename "eai:acl.app" as app
| eval haystack=title." ".qualifiedSearch
| join type=left max=0 [ | inputlookup rmm_tools | fields name | rename name as rmm_match
                         | eval haystack="*" ]
| where like(lower(haystack), "%" . lower(rmm_match) . "%")
| stats values(title) as detections values(actions) as actions count by rmm_match app author
| sort - count
</syntaxhighlight>

=== Currently Active Detections ===

The table below tracks scheduled detections covering RMM activity. Update on detection creation, retirement, or significant tuning. Any RMM listed in [[#Section 2 — Authorized RMMs|Section 2]] without at least one corresponding detection here represents a coverage gap and should be raised in the Gap Analysis section.

{| class="wikitable" style="width:100%;"
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Detection Name
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | RMM Coverage
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Action
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Purpose
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Owner
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Last Reviewed
|-
| ''<no current scheduled detections>'' || — || — || — || — || —
|}

'''Note:''' as of last review, no scheduled RMM-specific detections exist in production. The hunt queries developed under this program (see [[#Section 2 — Authorized RMMs|Authorized RMMs]] and [[Per-RMM Profiles]]) are candidates for promotion to scheduled detection status. This is the highest-priority gap to address.

=== Gap Analysis & Hunt Opportunities ===

Based on the current detection inventory, the following are potential analytics for hunt or for promotion to scheduled detection. Each maps to a specific data source and an indicator from [[#Section 3 — Disposition Triage|Section 3]].

{| class="wikitable" style="width:100%;"
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | # 
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Hunt Opportunity
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Primary Data Source
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Triage Tier
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Status
|-
| 1 || Unauthorized RMM service install (4697 with Service_Name not in Authorized RMMs) || Splunk <code>win_security</code> 4697 || Tier 1 || Hunt query developed
|-
| 2 || RMM execution from user-writable path (Temp, AppData, Public, Downloads, ProgramData<random-guid>) || MDE <code>DeviceProcessEvents</code> || Tier 1 || Hunt query developed
|-
| 3 || Tenant ID mismatch on authorized RMM (KACE appliance hostname, Bomgar appliance, Goverlan server, Adobe Connect URL) || Splunk 4688 + MDE <code>DeviceProcessEvents</code>, <code>DeviceFileEvents</code>, <code>DeviceRegistryEvents</code> || Tier 1 || Per-RMM queries in development
|-
| 4 || Multiple distinct RMMs on a single host (RMM stacking) || Splunk 4697 + 4688 || Tier 1 || Stack-rank query developed
|-
| 5 || Suspicious parent process for RMM install (powershell, mshta, Office, browser, LOLBINs spawning msiexec) || MDE <code>DeviceProcessEvents</code> || Tier 2 || Hunt query developed
|-
| 6 || RMM agent spawning interactive shells or LOLBINs post-install || MDE <code>DeviceProcessEvents</code> || Tier 3 || Hunt query developed
|-
| 7 || Discovery commands within 60 minutes of RMM install || MDE <code>DeviceProcessEvents</code> + 4697 correlation || Tier 3 || Correlation logic drafted
|-
| 8 || RMM agent listening on inbound port (AnyDesk:7070, MeshAgent/RURat configurable) || Stealthwatch / NetFlow + Sysmon EID 5/3 || Tier 3 || Network-side query in development
|-
| 9 || Portable AnyDesk execution (no service install, evades 4697-driven hunts) || MDE <code>DeviceFileEvents</code> + <code>DeviceProcessEvents</code> || Tier 1 || Coverage gap — file-event detection required
|-
| 10 || RMM binary signer mismatch (unsigned or signer ≠ vendor norm) || MDE <code>DeviceFileCertificateInfo</code> || Tier 1 || Hunt query developed
|}

== Section 2 — Authorized RMMs ==

This is the canonical reference for what RMMs are sanctioned in the environment. If an analyst sees an RMM artifact and cannot find a matching row below, treat the activity as unauthorized until proven otherwise. This table is the single source of truth that downstream triage logic depends on; keep it current.

'''Maintenance:''' Owner = TH Lead. Review cadence: quarterly, plus on any change request that introduces or retires an RMM. Tenant/Instance ID changes require same-day update. Fields marked <code><FILL></code> require environment-specific input from the listed Owner Team.

{| class="wikitable" style="width:100%;"
|+ Authorized RMMs in <ENVIRONMENT>
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | RMM
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Owner Team
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Approved Use Case
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Tenant / Instance ID
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Approved Host Classes
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Approved Installer (Account / Method)
|-
| Absolute (Computrace) || Endpoint Management || Persistent endpoint visibility, asset tracking, theft recovery || Customer ID <code><FILL></code> (Absolute Console) || All managed workstations and laptops || OEM BIOS-resident agent; activation by Endpoint Management
|-
| BeyondTrust (Bomgar) || Privileged Access (PAM) || Privileged remote access for IT/admin operations and vendor support sessions || Appliance: <code><FILL></code> (e.g., <code>support.<org>.com</code>) || Servers; IT admin workstations; designated vendor endpoints || PAM admin install via signed BeyondTrust package
|-
| Goverlan || EUC / Service Desk || End-user remote support; agent-based remote control || Goverlan server: <code><FILL></code> || Workstations || EUC admin push via Goverlan deployment console
|-
| Quest KACE Agent (formerly Dell KACE) || Endpoint Management || Systems management, software deployment, patch management, inventory || KACE appliance: <code><FILL></code> (K1000 / SMA hostname) || All managed Windows endpoints || KACE Agent provisioning (GPO push, SCCM, manual)
|-
| mRemoteNG || IT Engineering / SysAdmins || Multi-protocol connection manager (RDP/SSH/VNC) for admin sessions; '''admin use only''' || N/A — per-admin local config (no central tenant) || IT admin workstations '''only'''; not approved for general user population || Manual install by approved IT admin from authorized package source
|-
| Microsoft Quick Assist || EUC / Service Desk || Built-in Windows remote assistance for end-user troubleshooting || N/A — Microsoft-hosted; no per-tenant identifier || All Windows endpoints (built-in OS component) || Built-in OS component; no install required
|-
| DameWare (SolarWinds) || EUC / Service Desk || Remote support / mini remote control for end-user workstations || DameWare central server: <code><FILL></code> || Workstations || EUC admin push via DameWare Centralized deployment
|-
| Adobe Connect || Communications / Collaboration || Web conferencing; remote desktop control limited to authorized meeting hosts || URL: <code><FILL></code> (e.g., <code><org>.adobeconnect.com</code>) || All endpoints (web add-in) || User-installed add-in via approved download URL
|-
| Basecamp || PMO / Collaboration || Project management, team collaboration, file sharing || URL: <code><FILL></code> (e.g., <code>3.basecamp.com/<account-id></code>) || All endpoints (web/app) || Web-based; native app via approved channel
|}

=== How to populate this table ===

* '''RMM''' — vendor product name. One row per RMM family (do not split by version).
* '''Owner Team''' — team accountable for the deployment. They are the escalation point when an analyst needs a yes/no on a specific install.
* '''Approved Use Case''' — narrow this. "General IT support" is too vague to be actionable; "end-user remote support; on-demand technician sessions" lets an analyst recognize when an install falls outside scope.
* '''Tenant/Instance ID''' — the identifier that distinguishes our tenant from any other. Quest KACE: appliance hostname. BeyondTrust/Bomgar: appliance hostname. Goverlan: server hostname. Adobe Connect: account URL. Absolute: customer ID. mRemoteNG and Quick Assist do not have central tenant identifiers (per-host config or Microsoft-hosted respectively). [[Per-RMM Profiles]] gives the extraction logic for unauthorized RMMs that may appear in the environment.
* '''Approved Host Classes''' — workstation, server (with subtype), specific user populations. "All hosts" is rarely correct; most authorized RMMs deploy to a defined subset.
* '''Approved Installer (Account / Method)''' — the SubjectUserName in 4697 that should appear when this RMM is installed legitimately, and the deployment method (SCCM, Intune, manual by approved admin). Anything else in 4697 SubjectUserName = Tier 1 hit per [[#Section 3 — Disposition Triage|Section 3]].

'''Note on "shadow IT":''' Unauthorized but legitimate use (a team running an unsanctioned RMM for a real business purpose) and unauthorized malicious use produce identical Section 2 outcomes initially. Disambiguation happens in Section 3 triage. Do not pre-disposition based on assumed intent.

=== Authorized RMM Risk Notes ===

Authorization does not equal low risk. Several tools on the Authorized RMMs list have specific abuse patterns or credential-exposure risks that warrant analyst attention even when activity is in-scope.

* '''Microsoft Quick Assist — high abuse risk.''' Heavily abused by Storm-1811 (Black Basta affiliate cluster) and other groups in 2024-2025 as a vishing-based initial access vector. The attacker calls the user pretending to be IT, walks them through opening Quick Assist, has the user provide the security code, and gains interactive access. Detection focus: Quick Assist sessions ('''quickassist.exe''' execution) where the calling user has no associated change ticket or service desk record, especially on user workstations where IT had no prior business reason to remote in. Reference: Microsoft Threat Intelligence reporting on Storm-1811.
* '''mRemoteNG — credential exposure risk.''' mRemoteNG stores connection credentials in <code>confCons.xml</code> using AES encryption with a known weakness (CVE-2020-25776 and prior); password extraction is trivial with public tools. Treat any unauthorized access to an admin's mRemoteNG config file as a credential compromise event. Detection focus: file access events on <code>%APPDATA%\mRemoteNG\confCons.xml</code> by processes other than mRemoteNG itself.
* '''DameWare — historical CVE exposure.''' Multiple CVEs across DameWare's history including DNTU/MRC remote code execution and credential issues. Verify version currency on the DameWare central server and any mini remote-control client deployments. Detection focus: outbound DameWare connections from hosts that should not be administering systems remotely.
* '''Adobe Connect — remote control feature is often overlooked.''' The remote desktop control capability inside Adobe Connect meetings is a legitimate but underexamined remote-access vector. Restrict the role assignment that grants control privilege; treat unsolicited control prompts as social engineering until proven otherwise.
* '''mRemoteNG installation outside IT admin workstations is a Tier 1 hit.''' Per the Authorized Host Classes column, mRemoteNG is admin-only. Presence on a standard user workstation = unauthorized regardless of who installed it.

== Section 3 — Disposition Triage ==

Triage logic for an RMM artifact (4697 service install, 4688 process execution, MDE DeviceProcessEvents/DeviceRegistryEvents/DeviceFileEvents). Indicators are stacked. Tier 1 indicators are individually high-confidence and a single hit warrants escalation. Tier 2 indicators require two or more to combine before escalation. Tier 3 indicators are behavioral and confirmatory — they upgrade existing Tier 1/2 dispositions to confirmed compromise.

'''Decision rule:''' 1× Tier 1 OR 2× Tier 2 → escalate to investigation. Any Tier 3 hit on top of a Tier 1/2 disposition → upgrade to confirmed compromise and engage IR.

{| class="wikitable" style="width:100%;"
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF; width:8%;" | Tier
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF; width:55%;" | Indicator
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF; width:37%;" | Disposition Logic
|- style="background:#F8CBAD;"
| '''Tier 1''' || RMM is not on the [[#Section 2 — Authorized RMMs|Authorized RMMs]] list || Single hit. Treat as intrusion artifact until shadow-IT confirmed. Atera and Action1 specifically: ~90% of unauthorized hits in current intrusion data are malicious.
|- style="background:#F8CBAD;"
|  || RMM binary executes or installs from a user-writable path (Temp, AppData, Public, Downloads, ProgramData\<random-guid>) || Single hit. Vendor MSIs do not install here. Operator behavior.
|- style="background:#F8CBAD;"
|  || Service installed by a non-SYSTEM, non-IT-admin account || Single hit. 4697 SubjectUserName ≠ expected. Standard user installing remote-access service is a kill-chain artifact.
|- style="background:#F8CBAD;"
|  || Two or more distinct RMMs on the same endpoint || Single hit (except IT admin workstations). Operators routinely deploy a second RMM as redundant persistence.
|- style="background:#F8CBAD;"
|  || Authorized RMM family present, but tenant/instance ID does not match ours || Single hit. A KACE Agent pointing to a non-authorized KACE appliance, a Bomgar agent connecting to an unauthorized appliance, or a different Goverlan server hostname = different operator. Use the per-RMM profile for the extraction logic.
|- style="background:#F8CBAD;"
|  || Binary is unsigned, or signer ≠ vendor norm || Single hit. Tampered build or attacker re-pack. Cross-check DeviceFileCertificateInfo.
|- style="background:#FFE699;"
| '''Tier 2''' || Suspicious parent process for the install (powershell, mshta, wscript, cscript, rundll32, regsvr32, Office, browser, certutil, bitsadmin) || Two-hit threshold. Pivot to 4688 within ±5 min of 4697 to identify parent.
|- style="background:#FFE699;"
|  || Install timing off-hours, no change ticket, no preceding deployment activity (SCCM/Intune push, ticketed remote session) || Two-hit threshold. Cross-reference change-management.
|- style="background:#FFE699;"
|  || Install path inside Program Files but not the vendor's known directory (e.g., AnyDesk.exe in Common Files, Intel, System32) || Two-hit threshold. Vendors do not pick weird Program Files subdirectories.
|- style="background:#FFE699;"
|  || Single-host or near-single-host deployment of a managed RMM || Two-hit threshold. Stack 4697 by Service_Name across the estate; bottom of the stack-rank is suspect.
|- style="background:#FFE699;"
|  || Service install with auto-start type and SYSTEM run, but no entry in software inventory || Two-hit threshold. The CMDB / Intune / Tanium gap is the signal.
|- style="background:#C6E0B4;"
| '''Tier 3''' || Outbound connection from RMM agent to a non-corporate tenant (different KACE appliance hostname, different Bomgar appliance, unauthorized Adobe Connect URL, unauthorized Goverlan server) || Confirmatory. Per-RMM profile defines the tenant-identifier extraction.
|- style="background:#C6E0B4;"
|  || RMM agent listening on a port for incoming connections (vs. pure outbound) || Confirmatory. AnyDesk:7070, MeshAgent/RURat configurable. Most modern RMMs are outbound-only to SaaS broker; listener mode is unusual.
|- style="background:#C6E0B4;"
|  || RMM agent spawning interactive shells (cmd.exe, powershell.exe, wscript, mshta) or LOLBINs || Confirmatory of hands-on-keyboard. Legitimate technician sessions do this rarely and with a paired ticket.
|- style="background:#C6E0B4;"
|  || Discovery / lateral movement commands within 60 minutes of install (whoami /all, net group, nltest, quser, AD enumeration, SMB scanning) || Confirmatory. Standard post-deployment recon footprint.
|- style="background:#C6E0B4;"
|  || RMM agent dropping files outside its own install path (Temp, AppData, network shares) || Confirmatory. Agent should mostly do RPC/network I/O, not file staging.
|}

=== Triage workflow (analyst sequence on a 4697 hit) ===

# '''Look up the RMM in [[#Section 2 — Authorized RMMs|Section 2]].''' Not on the list → Tier 1 hit. Stop and escalate. (Other indicators still gathered for the case, but disposition is already set.)
# '''Check install path.''' Compare 4697 Service_File_Name against the per-RMM profile's expected paths. User-writable path → Tier 1 hit.
# '''Check installer identity.''' 4697 SubjectUserName must match an Approved Installer from Section 2. Mismatch → Tier 1 hit.
# '''Pivot ±5 minutes around the install for parent process.''' 4688 of msiexec or installer parent. Suspicious parent → Tier 2 hit.
# '''Check tenant identifier.''' Per-RMM profile defines the extraction (instance hash, AccountId GUID, server URL, etc.). Mismatch → Tier 1 hit.
# '''Check for second RMM on same host.''' Stack 4697 by host across last 30 days. Two distinct RMM families → Tier 1 hit.
# '''Check 60-minute post-install behavior.''' Discovery commands, agent spawning shells, file drops outside install path → Tier 3 hit, upgrade to confirmed compromise.

=== Worked examples ===

==== Example A — Legitimate authorized install ====

Sentinel fires on 4697 for service <code>Quest KACE Agent</code> on WKSTN-1234. Section 2 lookup: Quest KACE Agent is on the Authorized RMMs list (Owner: Endpoint Management). SubjectUserName: <code>NT AUTHORITY\SYSTEM</code> (parent: msiexec spawned by ccmexec.exe — SCCM deployment, consistent with KACE Agent provisioning). Install path: <code>C:\Program Files (x86)\Quest\KACE\</code>. KACE appliance configured (registry value): matches the authorized KACE server hostname recorded in Section 2. Single RMM service install in the past 30 days; no agent-spawned shells or discovery commands in the following hour.

'''Disposition:''' Authorized. Close as benign with a one-line note. No tier hits.

==== Example B — Shadow IT (unauthorized but not malicious) ====

4697 for <code>AteraAgent</code> on a marketing department workstation. Section 2 lookup: Atera not on authorized list → Tier 1 hit. Install path: <code>C:\Program Files\ATERA Networks\AteraAgent\</code> (vendor-normal). SubjectUserName: <code>NT AUTHORITY\SYSTEM</code>. Parent process (4688 pivot): msiexec spawned by explorer.exe — user double-clicked an installer. AccountId GUID extracted; matches a domain registered to a contractor the marketing team uses. No discovery commands, no agent shell-spawning.

'''Disposition:''' Tier 1 hit on the authorization list, no further hits. Escalate, but workflow is to engage the host owner and the team, not IR. Likely outcome: removal + Section 2 update or formal sanctioning.

==== Example C — Malicious install (confirmed compromise) ====

4697 for AnyDesk service on FILESRV-12. Section 2 lookup: AnyDesk not on authorized list → Tier 1 hit. Install path: <code>C:\Users\Public\Downloads\AnyDesk\AnyDesk.exe</code> → second Tier 1 hit. SubjectUserName: domain user account (not SYSTEM, not approved admin) → third Tier 1 hit. Parent process (4688 pivot): msiexec spawned by powershell.exe with encoded command-line containing <code>IEX (New-Object Net.WebClient).DownloadString</code> → Tier 2 hit. Within 20 minutes of install: <code>whoami /all</code>, <code>net group "domain admins" /domain</code>, <code>nltest /dclist all</code> → Tier 3 hit. AnyDesk listening on TCP 7070 → second Tier 3 hit.

'''Disposition:''' Confirmed compromise. Engage IR immediately. Containment priorities: isolate FILESRV-12, identify and disable the user account (likely compromised credentials), preserve memory for AnyDesk peer-ID extraction (connection_trace.txt), capture outbound netflow, hunt for lateral movement from this host.

== See Also ==

* [[Per-RMM Profiles]] — reference data for ScreenConnect, AnyDesk, Atera, Action1, SimpleHelp (and additional RMMs as added)
* [[Threat Hunt Program]] — parent program documentation
* [[PEAK Framework]] — methodology reference

[[Category:Threat Hunting]]
[[Category:RMM]]
[[Category:Detection Engineering]]

<syntaxhighlight lang="splunk">
| rest /servicesNS/-/-/saved/searches splunk_server=local timeout=0
       search="is_scheduled=1 disabled=0"
| table title author "eai:acl.app" updated actions qualifiedSearch
| rename "eai:acl.app" as app
| eval haystack=title." ".qualifiedSearch
| join type=left max=0 [ | inputlookup rmm_tools | fields name | rename name as rmm_match
                         | eval haystack="*" ]
| where like(lower(haystack), "%" . lower(rmm_match) . "%")
| stats values(title) as detections values(actions) as actions count by rmm_match app author
| sort - count
</syntaxhighlight>

=== Currently Active Detections ===

The table below tracks scheduled detections covering RMM activity. Update on detection creation, retirement, or significant tuning. Any RMM listed in [[#Section 2 — Authorized RMMs|Section 2]] without at least one corresponding detection here represents a coverage gap and should be raised in the Gap Analysis section.

{| class="wikitable" style="width:100%;"
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Detection Name
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | RMM Coverage
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Action
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Purpose
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Owner
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Last Reviewed
|-
| ''<no current scheduled detections>'' || — || — || — || — || —
|}

'''Note:''' as of last review, no scheduled RMM-specific detections exist in production. The hunt queries developed under this program (see [[#Section 2 — Authorized RMMs|Authorized RMMs]] and [[Per-RMM Profiles]]) are candidates for promotion to scheduled detection status. This is the highest-priority gap to address.

=== Gap Analysis & Hunt Opportunities ===

Based on the current detection inventory, the following are potential analytics for hunt or for promotion to scheduled detection. Each maps to a specific data source and an indicator from [[#Section 3 — Disposition Triage|Section 3]].

{| class="wikitable" style="width:100%;"
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | # 
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Hunt Opportunity
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Primary Data Source
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Triage Tier
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Status
|-
| 1 || Unauthorized RMM service install (4697 with Service_Name not in Authorized RMMs) || Splunk <code>win_security</code> 4697 || Tier 1 || Hunt query developed
|-
| 2 || RMM execution from user-writable path (Temp, AppData, Public, Downloads, ProgramData<random-guid>) || MDE <code>DeviceProcessEvents</code> || Tier 1 || Hunt query developed
|-
| 3 || Tenant ID mismatch on authorized RMM (KACE appliance hostname, Bomgar appliance, Goverlan server, Adobe Connect URL) || Splunk 4688 + MDE <code>DeviceProcessEvents</code>, <code>DeviceFileEvents</code>, <code>DeviceRegistryEvents</code> || Tier 1 || Per-RMM queries in development
|-
| 4 || Multiple distinct RMMs on a single host (RMM stacking) || Splunk 4697 + 4688 || Tier 1 || Stack-rank query developed
|-
| 5 || Suspicious parent process for RMM install (powershell, mshta, Office, browser, LOLBINs spawning msiexec) || MDE <code>DeviceProcessEvents</code> || Tier 2 || Hunt query developed
|-
| 6 || RMM agent spawning interactive shells or LOLBINs post-install || MDE <code>DeviceProcessEvents</code> || Tier 3 || Hunt query developed
|-
| 7 || Discovery commands within 60 minutes of RMM install || MDE <code>DeviceProcessEvents</code> + 4697 correlation || Tier 3 || Correlation logic drafted
|-
| 8 || RMM agent listening on inbound port (AnyDesk:7070, MeshAgent/RURat configurable) || Stealthwatch / NetFlow + Sysmon EID 5/3 || Tier 3 || Network-side query in development
|-
| 9 || Portable AnyDesk execution (no service install, evades 4697-driven hunts) || MDE <code>DeviceFileEvents</code> + <code>DeviceProcessEvents</code> || Tier 1 || Coverage gap — file-event detection required
|-
| 10 || RMM binary signer mismatch (unsigned or signer ≠ vendor norm) || MDE <code>DeviceFileCertificateInfo</code> || Tier 1 || Hunt query developed
|}

== Section 2 — Authorized RMMs ==

This is the canonical reference for what RMMs are sanctioned in the environment. If an analyst sees an RMM artifact and cannot find a matching row below, treat the activity as unauthorized until proven otherwise. This table is the single source of truth that downstream triage logic depends on; keep it current.

'''Maintenance:''' Owner = TH Lead. Review cadence: quarterly, plus on any change request that introduces or retires an RMM. Tenant/Instance ID changes require same-day update. Fields marked <code><FILL></code> require environment-specific input from the listed Owner Team.

{| class="wikitable" style="width:100%;"
|+ Authorized RMMs in <ENVIRONMENT>
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | RMM
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Owner Team
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Approved Use Case
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Tenant / Instance ID
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Approved Host Classes
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF;" | Approved Installer (Account / Method)
|-
| Absolute (Computrace) || Endpoint Management || Persistent endpoint visibility, asset tracking, theft recovery || Customer ID <code><FILL></code> (Absolute Console) || All managed workstations and laptops || OEM BIOS-resident agent; activation by Endpoint Management
|-
| BeyondTrust (Bomgar) || Privileged Access (PAM) || Privileged remote access for IT/admin operations and vendor support sessions || Appliance: <code><FILL></code> (e.g., <code>support.<org>.com</code>) || Servers; IT admin workstations; designated vendor endpoints || PAM admin install via signed BeyondTrust package
|-
| Goverlan || EUC / Service Desk || End-user remote support; agent-based remote control || Goverlan server: <code><FILL></code> || Workstations || EUC admin push via Goverlan deployment console
|-
| Quest KACE Agent (formerly Dell KACE) || Endpoint Management || Systems management, software deployment, patch management, inventory || KACE appliance: <code><FILL></code> (K1000 / SMA hostname) || All managed Windows endpoints || KACE Agent provisioning (GPO push, SCCM, manual)
|-
| mRemoteNG || IT Engineering / SysAdmins || Multi-protocol connection manager (RDP/SSH/VNC) for admin sessions; '''admin use only''' || N/A — per-admin local config (no central tenant) || IT admin workstations '''only'''; not approved for general user population || Manual install by approved IT admin from authorized package source
|-
| Microsoft Quick Assist || EUC / Service Desk || Built-in Windows remote assistance for end-user troubleshooting || N/A — Microsoft-hosted; no per-tenant identifier || All Windows endpoints (built-in OS component) || Built-in OS component; no install required
|-
| DameWare (SolarWinds) || EUC / Service Desk || Remote support / mini remote control for end-user workstations || DameWare central server: <code><FILL></code> || Workstations || EUC admin push via DameWare Centralized deployment
|-
| Adobe Connect || Communications / Collaboration || Web conferencing; remote desktop control limited to authorized meeting hosts || URL: <code><FILL></code> (e.g., <code><org>.adobeconnect.com</code>) || All endpoints (web add-in) || User-installed add-in via approved download URL
|-
| Basecamp || PMO / Collaboration || Project management, team collaboration, file sharing || URL: <code><FILL></code> (e.g., <code>3.basecamp.com/<account-id></code>) || All endpoints (web/app) || Web-based; native app via approved channel
|}

=== How to populate this table ===

* '''RMM''' — vendor product name. One row per RMM family (do not split by version).
* '''Owner Team''' — team accountable for the deployment. They are the escalation point when an analyst needs a yes/no on a specific install.
* '''Approved Use Case''' — narrow this. "General IT support" is too vague to be actionable; "end-user remote support; on-demand technician sessions" lets an analyst recognize when an install falls outside scope.
* '''Tenant/Instance ID''' — the identifier that distinguishes our tenant from any other. Quest KACE: appliance hostname. BeyondTrust/Bomgar: appliance hostname. Goverlan: server hostname. Adobe Connect: account URL. Absolute: customer ID. mRemoteNG and Quick Assist do not have central tenant identifiers (per-host config or Microsoft-hosted respectively). [[Per-RMM Profiles]] gives the extraction logic for unauthorized RMMs that may appear in the environment.
* '''Approved Host Classes''' — workstation, server (with subtype), specific user populations. "All hosts" is rarely correct; most authorized RMMs deploy to a defined subset.
* '''Approved Installer (Account / Method)''' — the SubjectUserName in 4697 that should appear when this RMM is installed legitimately, and the deployment method (SCCM, Intune, manual by approved admin). Anything else in 4697 SubjectUserName = Tier 1 hit per [[#Section 3 — Disposition Triage|Section 3]].

'''Note on "shadow IT":''' Unauthorized but legitimate use (a team running an unsanctioned RMM for a real business purpose) and unauthorized malicious use produce identical Section 2 outcomes initially. Disambiguation happens in Section 3 triage. Do not pre-disposition based on assumed intent.

=== Authorized RMM Risk Notes ===

Authorization does not equal low risk. Several tools on the Authorized RMMs list have specific abuse patterns or credential-exposure risks that warrant analyst attention even when activity is in-scope.

* '''Microsoft Quick Assist — high abuse risk.''' Heavily abused by Storm-1811 (Black Basta affiliate cluster) and other groups in 2024-2025 as a vishing-based initial access vector. The attacker calls the user pretending to be IT, walks them through opening Quick Assist, has the user provide the security code, and gains interactive access. Detection focus: Quick Assist sessions ('''quickassist.exe''' execution) where the calling user has no associated change ticket or service desk record, especially on user workstations where IT had no prior business reason to remote in. Reference: Microsoft Threat Intelligence reporting on Storm-1811.
* '''mRemoteNG — credential exposure risk.''' mRemoteNG stores connection credentials in <code>confCons.xml</code> using AES encryption with a known weakness (CVE-2020-25776 and prior); password extraction is trivial with public tools. Treat any unauthorized access to an admin's mRemoteNG config file as a credential compromise event. Detection focus: file access events on <code>%APPDATA%\mRemoteNG\confCons.xml</code> by processes other than mRemoteNG itself.
* '''DameWare — historical CVE exposure.''' Multiple CVEs across DameWare's history including DNTU/MRC remote code execution and credential issues. Verify version currency on the DameWare central server and any mini remote-control client deployments. Detection focus: outbound DameWare connections from hosts that should not be administering systems remotely.
* '''Adobe Connect — remote control feature is often overlooked.''' The remote desktop control capability inside Adobe Connect meetings is a legitimate but underexamined remote-access vector. Restrict the role assignment that grants control privilege; treat unsolicited control prompts as social engineering until proven otherwise.
* '''mRemoteNG installation outside IT admin workstations is a Tier 1 hit.''' Per the Authorized Host Classes column, mRemoteNG is admin-only. Presence on a standard user workstation = unauthorized regardless of who installed it.

== Section 3 — Disposition Triage ==

Triage logic for an RMM artifact (4697 service install, 4688 process execution, MDE DeviceProcessEvents/DeviceRegistryEvents/DeviceFileEvents). Indicators are stacked. Tier 1 indicators are individually high-confidence and a single hit warrants escalation. Tier 2 indicators require two or more to combine before escalation. Tier 3 indicators are behavioral and confirmatory — they upgrade existing Tier 1/2 dispositions to confirmed compromise.

'''Decision rule:''' 1× Tier 1 OR 2× Tier 2 → escalate to investigation. Any Tier 3 hit on top of a Tier 1/2 disposition → upgrade to confirmed compromise and engage IR.

{| class="wikitable" style="width:100%;"
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF; width:8%;" | Tier
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF; width:55%;" | Indicator
! style="background:#1F4E79; color:#FFFFFF; width:37%;" | Disposition Logic
|- style="background:#F8CBAD;"
| '''Tier 1''' || RMM is not on the [[#Section 2 — Authorized RMMs|Authorized RMMs]] list || Single hit. Treat as intrusion artifact until shadow-IT confirmed. Atera and Action1 specifically: ~90% of unauthorized hits in current intrusion data are malicious.
|- style="background:#F8CBAD;"
|  || RMM binary executes or installs from a user-writable path (Temp, AppData, Public, Downloads, ProgramData\<random-guid>) || Single hit. Vendor MSIs do not install here. Operator behavior.
|- style="background:#F8CBAD;"
|  || Service installed by a non-SYSTEM, non-IT-admin account || Single hit. 4697 SubjectUserName ≠ expected. Standard user installing remote-access service is a kill-chain artifact.
|- style="background:#F8CBAD;"
|  || Two or more distinct RMMs on the same endpoint || Single hit (except IT admin workstations). Operators routinely deploy a second RMM as redundant persistence.
|- style="background:#F8CBAD;"
|  || Authorized RMM family present, but tenant/instance ID does not match ours || Single hit. A KACE Agent pointing to a non-authorized KACE appliance, a Bomgar agent connecting to an unauthorized appliance, or a different Goverlan server hostname = different operator. Use the per-RMM profile for the extraction logic.
|- style="background:#F8CBAD;"
|  || Binary is unsigned, or signer ≠ vendor norm || Single hit. Tampered build or attacker re-pack. Cross-check DeviceFileCertificateInfo.
|- style="background:#FFE699;"
| '''Tier 2''' || Suspicious parent process for the install (powershell, mshta, wscript, cscript, rundll32, regsvr32, Office, browser, certutil, bitsadmin) || Two-hit threshold. Pivot to 4688 within ±5 min of 4697 to identify parent.
|- style="background:#FFE699;"
|  || Install timing off-hours, no change ticket, no preceding deployment activity (SCCM/Intune push, ticketed remote session) || Two-hit threshold. Cross-reference change-management.
|- style="background:#FFE699;"
|  || Install path inside Program Files but not the vendor's known directory (e.g., AnyDesk.exe in Common Files, Intel, System32) || Two-hit threshold. Vendors do not pick weird Program Files subdirectories.
|- style="background:#FFE699;"
|  || Single-host or near-single-host deployment of a managed RMM || Two-hit threshold. Stack 4697 by Service_Name across the estate; bottom of the stack-rank is suspect.
|- style="background:#FFE699;"
|  || Service install with auto-start type and SYSTEM run, but no entry in software inventory || Two-hit threshold. The CMDB / Intune / Tanium gap is the signal.
|- style="background:#C6E0B4;"
| '''Tier 3''' || Outbound connection from RMM agent to a non-corporate tenant (different KACE appliance hostname, different Bomgar appliance, unauthorized Adobe Connect URL, unauthorized Goverlan server) || Confirmatory. Per-RMM profile defines the tenant-identifier extraction.
|- style="background:#C6E0B4;"
|  || RMM agent listening on a port for incoming connections (vs. pure outbound) || Confirmatory. AnyDesk:7070, MeshAgent/RURat configurable. Most modern RMMs are outbound-only to SaaS broker; listener mode is unusual.
|- style="background:#C6E0B4;"
|  || RMM agent spawning interactive shells (cmd.exe, powershell.exe, wscript, mshta) or LOLBINs || Confirmatory of hands-on-keyboard. Legitimate technician sessions do this rarely and with a paired ticket.
|- style="background:#C6E0B4;"
|  || Discovery / lateral movement commands within 60 minutes of install (whoami /all, net group, nltest, quser, AD enumeration, SMB scanning) || Confirmatory. Standard post-deployment recon footprint.
|- style="background:#C6E0B4;"
|  || RMM agent dropping files outside its own install path (Temp, AppData, network shares) || Confirmatory. Agent should mostly do RPC/network I/O, not file staging.
|}

=== Triage workflow (analyst sequence on a 4697 hit) ===

# '''Look up the RMM in [[#Section 2 — Authorized RMMs|Section 2]].''' Not on the list → Tier 1 hit. Stop and escalate. (Other indicators still gathered for the case, but disposition is already set.)
# '''Check install path.''' Compare 4697 Service_File_Name against the per-RMM profile's expected paths. User-writable path → Tier 1 hit.
# '''Check installer identity.''' 4697 SubjectUserName must match an Approved Installer from Section 2. Mismatch → Tier 1 hit.
# '''Pivot ±5 minutes around the install for parent process.''' 4688 of msiexec or installer parent. Suspicious parent → Tier 2 hit.
# '''Check tenant identifier.''' Per-RMM profile defines the extraction (instance hash, AccountId GUID, server URL, etc.). Mismatch → Tier 1 hit.
# '''Check for second RMM on same host.''' Stack 4697 by host across last 30 days. Two distinct RMM families → Tier 1 hit.
# '''Check 60-minute post-install behavior.''' Discovery commands, agent spawning shells, file drops outside install path → Tier 3 hit, upgrade to confirmed compromise.

=== Worked examples ===

==== Example A — Legitimate authorized install ====

Sentinel fires on 4697 for service <code>Quest KACE Agent</code> on WKSTN-1234. Section 2 lookup: Quest KACE Agent is on the Authorized RMMs list (Owner: Endpoint Management). SubjectUserName: <code>NT AUTHORITY\SYSTEM</code> (parent: msiexec spawned by ccmexec.exe — SCCM deployment, consistent with KACE Agent provisioning). Install path: <code>C:\Program Files (x86)\Quest\KACE\</code>. KACE appliance configured (registry value): matches the authorized KACE server hostname recorded in Section 2. Single RMM service install in the past 30 days; no agent-spawned shells or discovery commands in the following hour.

'''Disposition:''' Authorized. Close as benign with a one-line note. No tier hits.

==== Example B — Shadow IT (unauthorized but not malicious) ====

4697 for <code>AteraAgent</code> on a marketing department workstation. Section 2 lookup: Atera not on authorized list → Tier 1 hit. Install path: <code>C:\Program Files\ATERA Networks\AteraAgent\</code> (vendor-normal). SubjectUserName: <code>NT AUTHORITY\SYSTEM</code>. Parent process (4688 pivot): msiexec spawned by explorer.exe — user double-clicked an installer. AccountId GUID extracted; matches a domain registered to a contractor the marketing team uses. No discovery commands, no agent shell-spawning.

'''Disposition:''' Tier 1 hit on the authorization list, no further hits. Escalate, but workflow is to engage the host owner and the team, not IR. Likely outcome: removal + Section 2 update or formal sanctioning.

==== Example C — Malicious install (confirmed compromise) ====

4697 for AnyDesk service on FILESRV-12. Section 2 lookup: AnyDesk not on authorized list → Tier 1 hit. Install path: <code>C:\Users\Public\Downloads\AnyDesk\AnyDesk.exe</code> → second Tier 1 hit. SubjectUserName: domain user account (not SYSTEM, not approved admin) → third Tier 1 hit. Parent process (4688 pivot): msiexec spawned by powershell.exe with encoded command-line containing <code>IEX (New-Object Net.WebClient).DownloadString</code> → Tier 2 hit. Within 20 minutes of install: <code>whoami /all</code>, <code>net group "domain admins" /domain</code>, <code>nltest /dclist all</code> → Tier 3 hit. AnyDesk listening on TCP 7070 → second Tier 3 hit.

'''Disposition:''' Confirmed compromise. Engage IR immediately. Containment priorities: isolate FILESRV-12, identify and disable the user account (likely compromised credentials), preserve memory for AnyDesk peer-ID extraction (connection_trace.txt), capture outbound netflow, hunt for lateral movement from this host.

== See Also ==

* [[Per-RMM Profiles]] — reference data for ScreenConnect, AnyDesk, Atera, Action1, SimpleHelp (and additional RMMs as added)
* [[Threat Hunt Program]] — parent program documentation
* [[PEAK Framework]] — methodology reference

[[Category:Threat Hunting]]
[[Category:RMM]]
[[Category:Detection Engineering]]
